docs: vacuum-module-instruction-manual (#21157)
OpenTrons/opentrons-api: docs/vacuum/docs/index.md

---
title: "Opentrons Automated Vacuum Module Gen 1"
hide: toc
---

<div style="text-align: center;" markdown>

> # Opentrons Automated Vacuum Module GEN1 Instruction Manual

Reviewer: Might be worth putting a line breaks in this header, to get the output:

Opentrons Automated Vacuum Module GEN1
Instruction Manual

Author: Adding line break.

> ![Vacuum module, waste carboy, and deck manifold render](images/test-1-HERO.png)

Reviewer: give images final names once ready

**Opentrons Labworks Inc.**<br>
September 2026

</div>

## Product Description

> The Opentrons Vacuum Module is an automated vacuum filtration system designed for the Opentrons Flex. The module ships with all components required to run solid-phase extraction (SPE) protocols to filter, concentrate, or purify samples.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Opentrons Vacuum Module is a fully automated vacuum filtration system with waste storage, designed for use with the Opentrons Flex. The module ships with all components required to run solid-phase extraction (SPE) protocols to filter, concentrate, or purify samples.
```

see my other suggestions for SPE extraction vs more general protocol suggestions with the VM.

> The system consists of an on-deck manifold stack, an off-deck Control Box housing the vacuum pump and electronics, a 2-liter glass carboy in a protective stabilization cradle, and all necessary hoses and adapters. The on-deck components accept ANSI/SLAS compliant vacuum filtration labware and are fully compatible with the Flex Gripper. You can control the Vacuum Module via the Opentrons App, the Flex touchscreen, or the Opentrons Python API.

Reviewer 2: just throwing out a request to confirm that we are going with "vacuum manifold" and not "vacuum base," which is the term Nick requested me to use in the one-sheeter

Author: Changing to "vacuum base."

> The system consists of an on-deck manifold stack, an off-deck Control Box housing the vacuum pump and electronics, a 2-liter glass waste collection jar in a protective stabilization cradle, and all necessary hoses and adapters. The on-deck components accept ANSI/SLAS compliant vacuum filtration labware and are fully compatible with the Flex Gripper. You can control the Vacuum Module via the Opentrons App, the Flex touchscreen, or the Opentrons Python API.

Reviewer: last sentence: we expect PD support as well!
